---
layout: post
title: an introduction to tensors outside the machine
category: tensors and deep learning
---

<div class="post-title">
<h1 class="accent-color">an introduction to tensors outside the machine</h1>
</div>

Tensors are ubiquitous in deep learning. One of the most popular Python frameworks used deep learning, `TensorFlow`, is even named after them. But they are also known to be quite tricky objects to master, and beginners often face having to learn tensors from resources that (seemingly) can't even agree on a single definition of what a tensor really *is*. Indeed, for many workers in machine learning, a tensor is simply a multidimensional array of numbers, but that is *not* what a tensor is if you ask, say, a theoretical mathematician or a physicist. Researchers in these latter fields conceive of a tensor as an abstract mathematical object that lives outside the machine. Every such abstract tensor has an array representation with respect to a chosen basis of the underlying vector space, and it is *these* concrete array representations that our machines store and manipulate. In particular, every abstract tensor has **infinitely** many array representations, and the defining property of a tensor is the way in which these array representations vary as the basis of the underlying vector space changes.

My first goal in this series of posts is to introduce the mathematics of abstract tensors. We will see how tensors arise very naturally from the desire to "multiply" vectors that live in (possibly) *distinct* vector spaces. We will take care to distinguish between two types of abstract tensors, and when these two types are mixed, I will show you how tensors become *dynamic* objects, with the ability to act on one another in very diverse ways. From there, we will move on to *tensor calculus*, which provides the foundation for the backpropagation algorithm used to train neural networks. In fact, our version of tensor calculus will simply be an application of the more general theory of calculus in normed vector spaces.

After all of this preliminary mathematical work, we will get down to the business of applying the theory to neural networks. I will show you how the theory may be implemented (from scratch!) as a fully-connected feedforward neural network coded in both `NumPy` and `TensorFlow`. Of course, these types of neural nets have been explained to death on the internet, and my implementation doesn't do anything that pre-existing networks can't already do. Instead, the novelty here arises from our particular theoretical viewpoint which, I think, provides a very clean way to conceptualize the backpropagation algorithm. Indeed, this algorithm is simply an application of the chain rule for Fréchet differentials.

So, it will be a few posts before neural networks make an appearance. The first posts in this series deal *exclusively* with mathematics. I am going to cover much more material than a beginner needs to know who wants to get up and running with `TensorFlow` as fast as possible. If that's you, then you might want to look for other treatments of tensors specifically (and exclusively) directed at applications in machine and deep learning. However, I do hope that you might return to my posts in the future, if you want to dig deeper into the theory of tensors!

## Prerequisites

You will need to have the basics of linear algebra mastered to get the most out of this series of posts. Here, by *linear algebra*, I mean more than simply *matrix algebra*. It's not enough to know, say, how to multiply matrices. You should also be familiar and comfortable with abstract vector spaces and their linear transformations, matrix representations of linear transformations with respect to bases, *etc*. For later posts that deal with tensor calculus, you will need a strong knowledge of multivariable calculus, but that's not important for this first post.

## Extended introduction

This initial section contains a further introduction to tensors and additional context. Nothing I write in this section will be crucial for understanding future sections, so if you want to get straight to the definitions, you may safely skip to the <a href="#rep-sec">section</a> below.

In the machine learning community, a *tensor* is a multidimensional array of numbers. If you think of a scalar as a $0$-dimensional array, a vector as a $1$-dimensional array, and a matrix as a $2$-dimensional array, then a tensor is just a natural generalization to higher dimensions.

Here, the word *dimension* is not being used in the strict linear-algebraic sense. As you know from your study of linear algebra, it is *vector spaces* that have *dimensions* associated with them, not individual vectors. In mathematics, the "dimension" of a tensor is often called its *rank* or *order*.

If we conceive of a tensor $T$ as an array of numbers, then its rank is the number of indices needed to describe the entries of $T$. For example, since the entries of a (column) vector $v = [v_i]$ can be uniquely identified using a single index, then we see $v$ is a rank-$1$ tensor. Similarly, the entries of a matrix $A = [A_{ij}]$ need two indices to be uniquely identified, and thus $A$ is a rank-$2$ tensor. The generalization to a rank-$3$ tensor is then obvious: Such an object is simply an array $T = [T_{ijk}]$ whose entries need *three* indices in order to be uniquely identified. If these indices range over the values

\begin{equation}\notag
1 \leq i \leq m, \quad 1 \leq j \leq n, \quad 1 \leq k \leq p,
\end{equation}

then we might say $T$ is a tensor of rank $3$ and size $m \times n \times p$. Tensors (as arrays of numbers) of rank $\geq 4$ are defined similarly.

Tensors (as arrays of numbers) occur often in machine learning, but they are *particularly* profuse in neural networks and deep learning. This is because the input features to a neural network often naturally take the shape of a multidimensional array of numbers. For example, an image input naturally forms the shape of a matrix of pixels (i.e., a rank-$2$ tensor), and there are often additional ranks added to the tensor to encode pixel color and other features. These tensors are often "flattened" into $1$-dimensional column vectors before being passed into a (feedforward, fully-connected) neural network, but this seems to be rather unnatural---why not just leave the data in its natural tensor form?

Perhaps one reason is pedagogical: Manipulating vectors requires just a basic knowledge of linear algebra, while manipulating tensors requires a knowledge of *multilinear* algebra. The latter is not taught very often, if ever---at least not at the universities I've been affiliated with.

Tensors are used in other disciplines, too, outside of machine learning, and the workers in these other disciplines often conceptualize tensors in seemingly *very* different ways. If I ask a theoretical mathematician, a physicist, an engineer, and a computer scientist to explain *tensors*, there's a good chance I would get four quite different explanations, with no one of them being more "right" than the others. This variety of explanations can make learning tensors difficult for the beginner, but it is also a manifestation of the incredible power and flexibility of tensors, given that they are useful in all of these different fields.

My own training is in theoretical mathematics. In certain areas of mathematics, like ring and module theory, the focus is on the *universal multilinear properties* of the tensor product as an abstract operation performed on abstract vector spaces (and modules). These universal properties are also important when tensors appear in other areas of mathematics, like differential geometry, but in this latter discipline, one often studies tensor *fields* on abstract manifolds that encode geometric properties of the underlying manifold, and differential geometers take care to distinguish between two different types of tensors, called *contravariant* and *covariant tensors*. But in almost all of these fields, a single tensor is *never* exclusively conceived as a single multidimensional array of numbers, as it would be in machine learning. In fact, one of the most important properties of a tensor in differential geometry is the pattern by which its array representations *change* or *vary* from one basis or coordinate system to another, which means that a single abstract tensor can, in general, be identified with an infinite number of arrays of numbers. So, I am *not* saying these arrays never appear or are not useful---indeed, they are *extremely* useful! But rather, I am saying that these arrays are understood as *attributes* of a tensor, and are never confused with the abstract tensor itself.[^footnote]

[^footnote]: I've written that an abstract tensor is *never* confused with one of its array representations, fully knowing that that's not actually true. :) I am using such strong language to try to communicate an important point. But it is often the case that we actually *do* intentionally identify or confuse a tensor with one of its array representations, and you will, in fact, see me do this several times in this series of posts. But the difference is that I *know* that I am confusing a tensor with an array, and I am doing it with care and caution. The problems arise when a person does *not* know they are confusing the two.

As I mentioned in the introduction, my overall goal in this series of posts is to implement and train a simple neural network based on the abstract mathematical theory that we develop. My viewpoint is centered on tensors as abstract mathematical objects, rather than simple arrays of numbers that appear as data structures in our code: To me, tensors live outside the machine, somewhere *out there* in the abstract mathematical aether. The interface between this idealized mathematical world and the machine world comes by way of *representation theory*, which is a broad collection of tools, techniques, and theorems that mathematicians use to represent abstract mathematical objects as concrete vectors, matrices, arrays, *etc*. The arrays that we will manipulate with our code, therefore, are viewed as *representations* of abstract tensors, rather than tensors themselves.

The treatment given here also takes seriously the two different ways that tensors are used in the backpropagation algorithm. On one hand, tensors are used to represent the input data to a neural network, but tensors are *also* used to implement the linear maps between the layers of neurons. Thus, tensors in a neural network are used both as *static* containers of data, and also as *dynamic* objects that act on and transform that data. Those with a training in abstract tensor analysis recognize that when tensors act on other tensors, it is often advantageous to use the language of contravariant and covariant tensors. My description of backpropagation will thus make use of these two types, and in order to help keep them straight, I will borrow the *abstract-index notation* and *summation convention* utilized by differential geometers and the folks who use differential geometry in their work (e.g., geometrical- and topological-minded physicists). This will give us the opportunity to explore the powerful `einsum` functions from the `NumPy` and `TensorFlow` libraries, which have become some of my favorite Python functions.

<div class="highlight-box">
**Warning.** Before we start the real work of defining tensors and their operations, however, you should be aware that different definitions and conventions regarding these gadgets utterly abound in the literature. The first point of divergence between various treatments of tensors is often at the most fundamental level, where some texts insist on defining their tensors as abstract vectors, while others define their tensors as "multilinear" functions. We follow the former track, but you'll see the latter in certain texts on differential geometry and physics. It can be shown that most (all?) of the definitions actually coincide "up to isomorphism" by using duality. But, even beyond this, there are other differences. Just keep all of this in mind if you compare my treatment of tensors to others you might find on the internet or textbooks.
</div>

<div id="rep-sec">
## The representation-theoretic viewpoint
</div>

Suppose that I give you an abstract vector space $V$ over $\mathbb{R}$. Spaces of column and row vectors are particular examples of abstract vector spaces, but $V$ very well could be a vector space of functions, for example. The *only* thing that I require of $V$ is that it satisfies the standard list of axioms that define an abstract vector space.

Now, even though $V$ may not literally be a space of column vectors, you learned in your linear algebra course that there is, nonetheless, a very close connection between $V$ and spaces of column vectors. Indeed, let's suppose that $V$ has finite dimension $n$, and that $\left\\{ e_1,\ldots,e_n\right\\}$ is an ordered basis of $V$. Then, given an arbitrary vector $v\in V$, there are unique scalars $c_1,\ldots,c_n$ such that

\begin{equation}\notag
v = c_1 e_1 + \cdots + c_n e_n.
\end{equation}

These scalars $c_1,\ldots,c_n$, which we call the *components* of $V$ (relative to the chosen basis), can be inserted into a column vector

\begin{equation}\notag
\begin{bmatrix} c_1 \\\ \vdots \\\ c_n \end{bmatrix} \in \mathbb{R}^n
\end{equation}

that is often called the *component vector* of $v$ (relative to the chosen basis). This process of passing from a vector $v\in V$ to its component vector in $\mathbb{R}^n$ sets up a one-to-one correspondence between $V$ and $\mathbb{R}^n$; this correspondence is even a linear transformation, and hence the mapping

\begin{equation}
\label{iso-eqn}
v \mapsto \begin{bmatrix} c_1 \\\ \vdots \\\ c_n \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation}

is an example of an *isomorphism* of vector spaces from $V$ to $\mathbb{R}^n$.

We can conceptualize the component vector of $v$ as a *concrete vector representation* of $v$. Using even more descriptive language, we can think of $v$ and its component vector as living in different worlds: The vector $v$, being an element of an abstract vector space, lives in some sort of abstract mathematical realm, while its component vector is an actual *thing* that has a much more concrete and immediate form of existence---for example, we can code the vector representation of $v$ and use machines to manipulate it! From this point of view, the representations \eqref{iso-eqn} provide a bridge between the mathematical and machine worlds, or the abstract and concrete worlds.[^who]

[^who]: The framework described in this last paragraph is more or less a description of *representation theory* as a whole. Through the representations that this theory provides, it links the two worlds on the opposite ends of an *abstract vs. concrete* spectrum.

An *abstract tensor* is nothing but a higher dimensional version of an abstract vector. These "higher dimensions" are reflected through a certain property of tensors called *multilinearity*, and this multilinearity means that tensors can no longer be represented using just simple vectors in $\mathbb{R}^n$, but rather, tensors are represented concretely as multidimensional arrays of numbers. These will be called *concrete array representations*, or just *array representations*.

So, just as every abstract vector $v$ may be represented concretely as a column vector through the association \eqref{iso-eqn}, so too will an abstract tensor $T$ be represented concretely as an array of numbers. However, as you learned in linear algebra, the concrete vector representations \eqref{iso-eqn} will change if the basis of the vector space $V$ is altered, and thus $v$ has infinitely many such representations. The same holds for the abstract tensor $T$, giving it infinitely many concrete array representations.

## Inventing tensors from hypothetical multiplications

With our representation-theoretic framework established, let's get down to the business of defining tensors. Motivated by the desire to "multiply" abstract vectors in as natural a manner as possible, we will "discover" tensors and tensor products. The goal is to show you that tensors arise quite naturally from a very humble origin, and are not as exotic and mysterious as you might have first imagined.[^table]

[^table]: You are likely already familiar with certain products of vectors, like dot products of vectors in $\mathbb{R}^n$ and cross products of vectors in $\mathbb{R}^3$: The first one produces a scalar from two vectors, while the second one produces a third vector from two vectors. But *those* are products that depend very heavily on the particularities of the vector spaces $\mathbb{R}^n$, whereas our vector spaces $V$ and $W$ have nothing more assumed about their structure beyond the fact that they are vector spaces.

So, suppose that you are given two arbitrary abstract vector spaces $V$ and $W$. Unless $V$ and $W$ have some sort of special structures, there is no obvious or natural way to "multiply" one vector $v$ in $V$ by another vector $w$ in $W$.

But, what if there *was* a way to multiply vectors in $V$ by vectors in $W$? What is the bare minimum of properties that we would want this multiplication to possess? Or, to use a word that is loaded with meaning in theoretical mathematics, we ask: What are the most *natural* properties that such a hypothetical multiplication should possess? Here, the word "natural" should be interpreted as *free of arbitrary and artificial choices*.

Let's use the symbol "$\otimes$" to denote this hypothetical multiplication, so that the product of $v\in V$ and $w\in W$ (in that order) is denoted $v\otimes w$. The first question we must address is: What sort of object should $v\otimes w$ be? Should it be a function? A number? An apple or an orange?

It would be quite natural to require $v\otimes w$ to itself be a vector. But then we must answer: A vector in what vector space? Is it a vector back in $V$? Or back in $W$? Since there is no obvious *natural* choice for what pre-existing vector space should contain the products $v\otimes w$, we invent a new one and denote it (naturally) by $V\otimes W$. Thus, not only do we have a new hypothetical product $\otimes$ between vectors, but we also have a new hypothetical vector space $V \otimes W$ which, by definition, consists of all products $v\otimes w$.

Formally, what we've done is define a *multiplication function* of the form

\begin{equation}\notag
m: V \times W \to V \otimes W,
\end{equation}

where an order pair $(v,w)$ in the domain is mapped to its product $m(v,w) = v \otimes w$ in the codomain. Of course, I am using the letter "$m$" to stand for "multiplication."

It would be quite natural to require that our new product $\otimes$ distributes over addition, so that the two equations

\begin{equation}
\label{first_multlinear-eqn}
(v + v') \otimes w = v \otimes w + v' \otimes w
\end{equation}

and

\begin{equation}
\label{second_multlinear-eqn}
v \otimes (w+w') = v\otimes w + v \otimes w'
\end{equation}

both hold, for all $v,v' \in V$ and all $w,w' \in W$. Take care to note that the addition signs on the two sides of the equations mean different things: On the left-hand side of \eqref{first_multlinear-eqn}, the addition is happening in $V$, while on the right-hand side, the addition is happening in our new vector space $V\otimes W$. Likewise, the addition on the left-hand side of \eqref{second_multlinear-eqn} is happening in $W$, while the addition on the right-hand side is (again) happening in our new vector space.

You should think of these two equations \eqref{first_multlinear-eqn} and \eqref{second_multlinear-eqn} as an expression of how the two addition operations in $V$ and $W$ interact with the addition operation in $V \otimes W$. These three additions do not interact with each other in some wildly random way, but rather they fit together cleanly and coherently as expressed in these equations.

Similarly, it would be natural to require that the scaling operations in $V$, $W$, and $V\otimes W$ all play well together. This is expressed by requiring that the equations

\begin{equation}
\label{third_multlinear-eqn}
(cv) \otimes w = c(v \otimes w)
\end{equation}

and

\begin{equation}
\label{fourth_multlinear-eqn}
v \otimes (cw) = c(v\otimes w)
\end{equation}

both hold, for all $v\in V$, $w\in W$, and $c\in \mathbb{R}$. As with the first pair of equations \eqref{first_multlinear-eqn} and \eqref{second_multlinear-eqn}, the juxtaposition of vectors and scalars on the two sides of these equations mean different things: The scaling operation on the left-hand side of \eqref{third_multlinear-eqn} is happening in $V$, while the scaling operation on the right-hand side is happening in $V\otimes W$. Similarly for
\eqref{fourth_multlinear-eqn}.

The requirement that our new product $\otimes$ satisfies the relations \eqref{first_multlinear-eqn}, \eqref{second_multlinear-eqn}, \eqref{third_multlinear-eqn}, and \eqref{fourth_multlinear-eqn} is exactly what it means for the product $\otimes$ (or, more precisely, the function $m$) to be *bilinear*.

## The Tensor Existence Theorem

Since it does not seem that there are any more *natural* properties that our product $\otimes$ should satisfy (I can't think of more---can you?), it seems that the *only* thing we should require of $\otimes$ is bilinearity. But remember that this scenario is all hypothetical---we began our little thought experiment by *assuming* that such a product $\otimes$ exists. But does it? The answer is provided by:

<div class="highlight-box" id="tensor-existence-thm">
**Tensor Existence Theorem.** Both the vector space $V \otimes W$ and the bilinear product $\otimes$ exist. Furthermore, the vector space $V \otimes W$ and the bilinear product $\otimes$ are *universal*, in the sense that every other bilinear product on $V$ and $W$ is obtained from $\otimes$ by introducing extra relations, in addition to the bilinearity relations \eqref{first_multlinear-eqn}, \eqref{second_multlinear-eqn}, \eqref{third_multlinear-eqn}, and \eqref{fourth_multlinear-eqn}.
</div>

Some explanation is in order. First, when I say that $V \otimes W$ and the bilinear product $\otimes$ *exist*, I mean that there is a vector space $V \otimes W$ and a product $\otimes$ that satisfy the bilinearity relations, and *no more relations*. This makes $\otimes$ the "basic template" for a bilinear multiplication, a property of $\otimes$ which is encoded in the universal property in the theorem. The universal property also implies that $V\otimes W$ and $\otimes$ are *unique*, at least "up to isomorphism."

The vector space $V \otimes W$ is called the *tensor product* of $V$ and $W$, and the product $v \otimes w$ is called the *tensor product* of $v$ and $w$. The proof of the theorem, of course, requires an explicit construction of the tensor products. However, this explict construction is absolutely and completely of no use for us. The *only* properties of the tensor products $v\otimes w$ that we ever use are the bilinearity relations, and these are independent of the particular construction.

This means that, when asked what the tensor product $v\otimes w$ actually *means* or actually *is*, the answer is: *We don't care what it actually is.* Its precise meaning is not important and does not matter. Just treat $v\otimes w$ as a formal expression representing the result of multiplying $v$ by $w$ via this (universal) bilinear product $\otimes$, which is guaranteed to exist by the [Tensor Existence Theorem](#tensor-existence-thm).

## The Tensor Basis Theorem

The vector space $V\otimes W$ is spanned by the tensor products $v \otimes w$. This means that an arbitrary vector in $V \otimes W$ is a linear combination of the form

\begin{equation}\notag
c_1(v_1 \otimes w_1) + \cdots + c_n (v_n \otimes w_n),
\end{equation}

where the $v_i$'s are in $V$, the $w_j$'s are in $W$, and $c_1,\ldots,c_n\in \mathbb{R}$. This makes the tensor product $V \otimes W$ very different from the cartesian product $V \times W$, because an arbitrary vector in the latter is of the form $(v,w)$, whereas an arbitrary vector in $V \otimes W$ is *not* of the form $v\otimes w$. Nevertheless, it is possible to identify a basis of $V \otimes W$, given bases of the two tensor factors:

<div class="highlight-box" id="tensor-basis-thm">
**Tensor Basis Theorem**. Suppose $V$ and $W$ are both finite-dimensional, with ordered basis $\{e_1,\ldots,e_m\}$ and $\{f_1,\ldots,f_n\}$. Then $V \otimes W$ has a basis given by the set

\begin{equation}\notag
\left\\{ e_\alpha \otimes f_\beta : \alpha=1,\ldots,m; \ \beta=1,\ldots,n \right\\}.
\end{equation}

Thus $\dim{(V\otimes W)} = (\dim{V})(\dim{W})$.
</div>

Therefore, if $T \in V \otimes W$ is a tensor (i.e., a vector in the tensor product), and we've selected bases of $V$ and $W$ as in the theorem, we may write

\begin{equation}
\label{first_tensor-eqn}
T = \sum_{\alpha=1}^m \sum_{\beta=1}^n T^{\alpha\beta} \ e_\alpha \otimes f_\beta,
\end{equation}

for some (unique!) collection of scalars $T^{\alpha\beta} \in \mathbb{R}$, called the *components* of $T$ (relative to the chosen bases).

It is traditional in some treatments of tensors (which we will follow) to use the same letter for the components of a tensor as the tensor itself (in this case, the letter "$T$") and to index the components of tensors using lowercase Greek letters. This double use of the letter $T$ can be misleading because it seems to imply that a tensor has only *one* set of components, but in reality we know that the components depend on the choice of bases. Furthermore, because double (and more!) summations of the form \eqref{first_tensor-eqn} appear so often, a *summation convention* is often employed that utilizes the relative positions of upper and lower indices. For example, using this convention, the  equation \eqref{first_tensor-eqn} would be written as

\begin{equation}
\label{comp_exp-eqn}
T = T^{\alpha\beta} \ e_\alpha \otimes f_\beta,
\end{equation}

with the explicit summations omitted. The convention dictates that whenever an index appears in *both* an upper and lower position in an expression, summation over that repeated index is implied (over some range of values which is clarified by context). Here, in this last equation \eqref{comp_exp-eqn}, because both $\alpha$ and $\beta$ appear in upper and lower positions, the convention tells us that summations over those indices is implied.

As another example, a vector $v\in V$ written as a linear combination

\begin{equation}\notag
v = \sum_{\alpha=1}^m v^\alpha e_\alpha,
\end{equation}

with components $v^\alpha \in \mathbb{R}$, would be written very simply as

\begin{equation}
\label{vec_comp_exp-eqn}
v = v^\alpha e_\alpha,
\end{equation}

with the summation over $\alpha$ implied by the summation convention.

Through the [Tensor Basis Theorem](#tensor-basis-thm), the component expressions \eqref{comp_exp-eqn} provide the link between abstract tensors and concrete array representations. Indeed, just as we peel off the components $v^\alpha$ of the vector $v$ in \eqref{vec_comp_exp-eqn} to create its concrete vector representation

\begin{equation}\notag
\begin{bmatrix} v^1 \\\ \vdots \\\ v^m \end{bmatrix},
\end{equation}

so too we use the components of $T$ in \eqref{comp_exp-eqn} to create the *concrete array representation* (relative to the choice of bases) given by

\begin{equation}\notag
\begin{bmatrix}
T^{11} & \cdots & T^{1n} \\\ \vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\\ T^{m1} & \cdots & T^{mn}
\end{bmatrix}.
\end{equation}

In this case, because $T$ is a *rank $2$* tensor (more on this later), the concrete array representation of $T$ is a matrix.

## What's next?

We have only just touched the beginning of the theory. The tensor product that we defined in this post might be called a *binary tensor product*, or *$2$-fold tensor product*. We will extend this definition to an arbitrary number $n$ of vector spaces, creating *$n$-fold tensor products*. These tensor products are a particular type of tensor product called *contravariant*; we will define the other types of tensors, called *covariant tensors*, but that definition will first require a preliminary discussion of linear duality. All of this will be covered in the next few posts!

## Further reading

I first learned tensor products from Atiyah and MacDonald's classic text *Introduction to Commutative Algebra* [^AtiyahMacDonald1969]. The treatment of tensors given there is for modules over an arbitrary commutative ring, not necessarily a field like $\bbr$. My flippant attitude regarding what a tensor product actually *is*, is summarized by Atiyah and MacDonald when they write:

> *We shall never again need to use the construction of the tensor product given in [Proposition 2.12 in the text], and the reader may safely forget it if [they] prefer. What is essential to keep in mind is the defining property of the tensor product [i.e., its universal property].*


So, my dismissal of the question "What is a tensor product, actually?" as unimportant actually reflects the attitude toward tensor products of many working mathematicians. If, however, you'd like to see a construction of the tensor product and a proof of the [Tensor Existence Theorem](#tensor-existence-thm), then I refer you to Atiyah and MacDonald's text and the proposition cited in the quote above. When they say "module over a ring", you are free to substitute "vector space over $\bbr$."

Besides Atiyah and MacDonald's text, I also recommend Mac Lane and Birkhoff's simply-titled text *Algebra*[^BirkhoffMacLane1988]. In Chapter XVI of this latter text, both contravariant *and* covariant tensors are introduced, the latter of which are not mentioned in Atiyah and MacDonald's text.

## References and footnotes

[^AtiyahMacDonald1969]: M. F. Atiyah and I. G. MacDonald. *Introduction to Commutative Algebra. Advanced Book Program.* Westview Press, 1969.

[^BirkhoffMacLane1988]: S. MacLane and G. Birkhoff. *Algebra.* Chelsea Publishing Co., New York, third edition, 1988.